This is a LibriVox recording.
All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information and to find out how you can volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
Recording by Moira Fogarty.
The Art of War by Sun Tzu.
Translated by Lionel Giles.
Part V. Energy.
Sun Tzu said, The control of a large force is the same principle as the control of a
few men.
It is merely a question of dividing up their numbers.
Fighting with a large army under your command is no wise different from fighting with a
small one.
It is merely a question of instituting signs and signals.
To ensure that your whole host may withstand the brunt of the enemy's attack and remain
unshaken, this is affected by maneuvers direct and indirect.
That the impact of your army may be like a grindstone dashed against an egg, this is
affected by the science of weak points and strong.
In all fighting, the direct method may be used for joining battle, but indirect methods
will be needed in order to secure victory.
Indirect tactics, efficiently applied, are inexhaustible as heaven and earth, unending
as the flow of rivers and streams.
Like the sun and moon, they end but to begin anew.
Like the four seasons, they pass away to return once more.
There are not more than five musical notes, yet the combinations of these five give rise
to more melodies than can ever be heard.
There are not more than five primary colors—blue, yellow, red, white, and black—yet in combination
they produce more hues than can ever be seen.
There are not more than five cardinal tastes—sour, acrid, salt, sweet, bitter—yet combinations
of them yield more flavors than can ever be tasted.
In battle, there are not more than two methods of attack, the direct and the indirect, yet
these two in combination give rise to an endless series of maneuvers.
The direct and the indirect lead on to each other in turn.
It is like moving in a circle—you never come to an end.
Who can exhaust the possibilities of their combination?
The onset of troops is like the rush of a torrent which will even roll stones along
in its course.
The quality of decision is like the well-timed swoop of a falcon which enables it to strike
and destroy its victim.
Therefore, the good fighter will be terrible in his onset and prompt in his decision.
Energy may be likened to the bending of a crossbow, decision to the releasing of a trigger.
Amid the turmoil and tumult of battle, there may be seeming disorder, and yet no real disorder
at all.
Amid confusion and chaos, your array may be without head or tail, yet it will be proof
against defeat.
Simulated disorder postulates perfect discipline.
Simulated fear postulates courage.
Simulated weakness postulates strength.
Hiding order beneath the cloak of disorder is simply a question of subdivision.
Concealing courage under their show of timidity presupposes a fund of latent energy.
Masking strength with weakness is to be affected by tactical dispositions.
Thus, one who is skillful at keeping the enemy on the move maintains deceitful appearances
according to which the enemy will act.
He sacrifices something that the enemy may snatch at it.
By holding out baits he keeps him on the march, then with a body of picked men he lies in
wait for him.
The clever combatant looks to the effect of combined energy and does not require too much
from individuals, hence his ability to pick out the right men and utilize combined energy.
When he utilizes combined energy, his fighting men become as it were like unto rolling logs
or stones, for it is the nature of a log or stone to remain motionless on level ground
and to move when on a slope, if four-cornered to come to a standstill, but if round shaped
to go rolling down.
Thus the energy developed by good fighting men is as the momentum of a round stone rolled
down a mountain thousands of feet in height.
So much on the subject of energy.
End of part five.
Part six.
Weak points and strong.
Sun Tzu said, whoever is first in the field and awaits the coming of the enemy will be
fresh for the fight.
Whoever is second in the field and has to hasten to battle will arrive exhausted.
Therefore, the clever combatant imposes his will on the enemy, but does not allow the
enemy's will to be imposed on him.
By holding out advantages to him, he can cause the enemy to approach of his own accord, or
by inflicting damage, he can make it impossible for the enemy to draw near.
If the enemy is taking his ease, he can harass him.
If well supplied with food, he can starve him out.
If quietly encamped, he can force him to move.
Appear at points which the enemy must hasten to defend.
March swiftly to places where you are not expected.
An army may march great distances without distress if it marches through country where
the enemy is not.
You can be sure of succeeding in your attacks if you only attack places which are undefended.
You can ensure the safety of your defense if you only hold positions that cannot be
attacked.
Hence the general is skillful in attack whose opponent does not know what to defend, and
he is skillful in defense whose opponent does not know what to attack.
O divine art of subtlety and secrecy, through you we learn to be invisible, through you
inaudible, and hence we can hold the enemy's fate in our hands.
You may advance and be absolutely irresistible if you make for the enemy's weak points.
You may retire and be safe from pursuit if your movements are more rapid than those of
the enemy.
If we wish to fight, the enemy can be forced to an engagement even though he be sheltered
behind a high rampart and a deep ditch.
All we need do is attack some other place that he will be obliged to relieve.
If we do not wish to fight, we can prevent the enemy from engaging us even though the
lines of our encampment be merely traced out on the ground.
All we need do is throw something odd and unaccountable in his way.
By discovering the enemy's dispositions and remaining invisible ourselves, we can keep
our forces concentrated while the enemy's must be divided.
We can form a single united body while the enemy must split up into fractions.
Hence there will be a whole pitted against separate parts of a whole, which means that
we shall be many to the enemy's few.
And if we are able thus to attack an inferior force with a superior one, our opponents will
be in dire straits.
The spot where we intend to fight must not be made known, for then the enemy will have
to prepare against a possible attack at several different points.
And his forces being thus distributed in many directions, the numbers we shall have to face
at any given point will be proportionately few.
For should the enemy strengthen his van, he will weaken his rear.
Should he strengthen his rear, he will weaken his van.
Should he strengthen his left, he will weaken his right.
Should he strengthen his right, he will weaken his left.
If he sends reinforcements everywhere, he will everywhere be weak.
Numerical weakness comes from having to prepare against possible attacks.
Numerical strength from compelling our adversary to make these preparations against us.
Knowing the place and the time of the coming battle, we may concentrate from the greatest
distances in order to fight.
But if neither time nor place be known, then the left wing will be impotent to secure the
right, the right equally impotent to secure the left, the van unable to relieve the rear
or the rear to support the van.
How much more so if the furtherest proportions of the army are anything under a hundred li
apart, and even the nearest are separated by several li?
Though according to my estimate the soldiers of Yue exceed our own in number, that shall
advantage them nothing in the matter of victory.
I say then that victory can be achieved.
Though the enemy be stronger in numbers, we may prevent him from fighting.
Scheme so as to discover his plans and the likelihood of their success.
Rouse him and learn the principle of his activity or inactivity.
Force him to reveal himself so as to find out his vulnerable spots.
Carefully compare the opposing army with your own, so that you may know where strength is
superabundant and where it is deficient.
In making tactical dispositions, the highest pitch you can attain is to conceal them.
Conceal your dispositions and you will be safe from the prying of the subtlest spies
from the machinations of the wisest brains.
How victory may be produced for them out of the enemy's own tactics, that is what the
multitude cannot comprehend.
All men can see the tactics whereby I conquer, but what none can see is the strategy out
of which victory is evolved.
Do not repeat the tactics which have gained you one victory, but let your methods be regulated
by the infinite variety of circumstances.
Military tactics are like unto water, for water in its natural course runs away from
high places and hastens downwards.
So in war, the way is to avoid what is strong and to strike at what is weak.
Water shapes its course according to the nature of the ground over which it flows.
The soldier works out his victory in relation to the foe whom he is facing.
Therefore, just as water retains no constant shape, in warfare there are no constant conditions
He who can modify his tactics in relation to his opponent and thereby succeed in winning
may be called a heaven-born captain.
The five elements, water, fire, wood, metal, earth, are not always equally predominant.
The four seasons make way for each other in turn.
There are short days and long.
The moon has its periods of waning and waxing.
End of part 6
Recorded in Toronto, Ontario by Moira Fogarty, October 2006